
In this lecture, we'll describe the Framingham Heart Study, one
of the most important epidemiological studies ever
conducted, and the underlying analytics that
led to our current understanding of cardiovascular disease.

To motivate how the study affected our understanding
of blood pressure today, we describe the case
of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, FDR
for short, who was the President of the United States
from 1933 to 1945.
He was the longest-serving president of the United States,
and he led the country during difficult times --
the Great Depression, and World War II.
He died while President on April 12, 1945.
Before the presidency, FDR's blood pressure was 140/100.
Today, healthy blood pressure is considered
to be less than 120/80.
So therefore, 140/100 is today considered high blood pressure.
One year before his death, his blood pressure was 210/120.
Today this is called hypertensive crisis,
and emergency care is needed.
On the other hand, FDR's personal physician
said a moderate degree of atherosclerosis
although no more than normal for a man of his age.
Two months before his death, his blood pressure was 260/150,
and the day of his death was 300/190.
There were early misconceptions in the first half
of the 20th century about blood pressure.
High blood pressure, dubbed essential hypertension,
was considered important to force blood through arteries,
and it was considered harmful to lower blood pressure.
Today, of course, we know better.
In the words of Daniel Levy, the Framingham Heart Study
director, "today presidential blood pressure numbers
like FDR's would send the country's leading doctors
racing down hallways, whisking the nation's leader
into the cardiac care unit of Bethesda Naval Hospital."
So how did we learn?

In the late 1940s, the US government
set out to better understand cardiovascular disease.
The plan was to track a large cohort of initially healthy
patients over their lifetimes.
A city was chosen, the city of Framingham, Massachusetts,
to be the site for the study.
Framingham has an appropriate size.
It's not too large, it's not too small.
It has a stable population that doesn't move too much.
And the doctors and residents were quite cooperative.
So in 1948, the Framingham Heart Study started.

The study included 5,209 patients, aged 30 to 59.
Patients were given a questionnaire
and an examination every two years.
During this examination, their physical characteristics
were recorded, their behavioral characteristics, as well as
test results.
Exams and questions expanded over time,
but the key in the study was that the trajectory
of the health of the patients was
followed during their entire lifespan.
In this class, we will build models
using the Framingham data to predict and prevent
heart disease.