
The topic of this recitation is election forecasting,
which is the art and science of predicting
the winner of an election before any votes are actually
cast using polling data from likely voters.
In this recitation, we are going to look at the United States
presidential election.
In the United States, a president
is elected every four years.
And while there are a number of different political parties
in the US, generally there are only two
competitive candidates.
There's the Republican candidate,
who tends to be more conservative,
and the Democratic candidate, who's more liberal.
So for instance a recent Republican president
was George W. Bush, and a recent Democratic president
was Barack Obama.
Now while in many countries the leader of the country
is elected using the simple candidate who
receives the largest number of votes across the entire country
is elected, in the United States it's
significantly more complicated.
There are 50 states in the United States,
and each is assigned a number of electoral votes
based on its population.
So for instance, the most populous state, California,
in 2012 had nearly 20 times the number of electoral votes
as the least populous states.
And these number of electoral votes
are reassigned periodically based
on changes of populations between states.
Within a given state in general, the system
is winner take all in the sense that the candidate who receives
the most vote in that state gets all of its electoral votes.
And then across the entire country,
the candidate who receives the most electoral votes
wins the entire presidential election.
Now while it seems like a somewhat subtle distinction,
the electoral college versus the simple popular vote model,
it can have very significant consequences
on the outcome of the election.
As an example, let's look at the 2000 presidential election
between George W. Bush and Al Gore.
As we can see on the right here, Al Gore
received more than 500,000 more votes across the entire country
than George W. Bush in terms of the popular vote.
But in terms of the electoral vote,
because of how those votes were distributed,
George Bush actually won the election
because he received five more electoral votes than Al Gore.
So our goal will be to use polling data that's
collected from likely voters before the election
to predict the winner in each state,
and therefore to enable us to predict
the winner of the entire election
in the electoral college system.
While election prediction has long attracted some attention,
there's been a particular interest
in the problem for the 2012 presidential election,
when then-New York Times columnist Nate
Silver took on the task of predicting
the winner in each state.
To carry out this prediction task,
we're going to use some data from RealClearPolitics.com that
basically represents polling data that was collected
in the months leading up to the 2004, 2008, and 2012 US
presidential elections.
Each row in the data set represents a state
in a particular election year.
And the dependent variable, which is called Republican,
is a binary outcome.
It's 1 if the Republican won that state
in that particular election year,
and a 0 if a Democrat won.
The independent variables, again,
are related to polling data in that state.
So for instance, the Rasmussen and SurveyUSA variables
are related to two major polls that
are assigned across many different states in the United
States.
And it represents the percentage of voters
who said they were likely to vote Republican
minus the percentage who said they
were likely to vote Democrat.
So for instance, if the variable SurveyUSA in our data set
has value -6, it means that 6% more voters
said they were likely to vote Democrat
than said they were likely to vote Republican in that state.
We have two additional variables that
capture polling data from a wider range of polls.
Rasmussen and SurveyUSA are definitely not the only polls
that are run on a state by state basis.
DiffCount counts the number of all the polls leading up
to the election that predicted a Republican winner in the state,
minus the number of polls that predicted a Democratic winner.
And PropR, or proportion Republican,
has the proportion of all those polls leading up
to the election that predicted a Republican winner.
