
So far, we have used what is known as internal validation
to test our model.
This means that we took the data from one set of patients
and split them into a training set and a testing set.
While this confirms that our model is
good at making predictions for patients in the Framingham
Heart Study population, it's unclear
if the model generalizes to other populations.
The Framingham cohort of patients
were white, middle class adults.
To be sure that the model extends
to other types of patients, we need
to test on other populations.
This is known as external validation.

There have been many studies to test the Framingham model
from the influential 1998 paper on diverse cohorts.
This table shows a sample of studies
that tested the model on populations
with different races.
The researchers for each study collected the same risk
factors used in the original study,
predicted CHD using the Framingham Heart Study model,
and then analyzed how accurate the model
was for that population.
For some populations, the Framingham model was accurate.
For the ARIC study that tested the model with black men,
this figure shows a bar graph of how the Framingham predictions
compare with the actual results.
The gray bars are the predictions.
And the black bars are the actual outcomes.
The patients are sorted on the x-axis by predicted risk
and on the y-axis by the percentage of patients
in each group who actually developed CHD.
For the most part, the predictions are accurate.
There's one group for which the model under-predicted the risk
and one group for which the model over-predicted the risk.
But for other populations, the Framingham model
was not as accurate.
For the HHS study with Japanese-American men,
the Framingham model systematically
over-predicts a risk of CHD.

The model can be recalibrated for this population
by scaling down the predictions.
This changes the predicted risk but not
the order of the predictions.
The high risk patients still have higher predictions
than the lower risk patients.
This allows the model to have more accurate risk estimates
for populations not included in the original group of patients.
For models that will be used on different populations
than the one used to create the model,
external validation is critical.