
As usual, we will start by reading in our data
and looking at it in the R console.
So we can create a data frame called polling
using the read.csv function for our PollingData.csv file.
And we can take a look at its structure with the str command.
And what we can see is that as expected,
we have a state and a year variable for each observation,
as well as some polling data and the outcome
variable, Republican.
So something we notice right off the bat
is that even though there are 50 states and three election
years, so we would expect 150 observations,
we actually only have 145 observations in the data frame.
So using the table function, we can
look at the breakdown of the polling data frame's Year
variable.
And what we see is that while in the 2004 and 2008 elections,
all 50 states have data reported, in 2012, only 45
of the 50 states have data.
And actually, what happened here is
that pollsters were so sure about the five missing states
that they didn't perform any polls in the months leading up
to the 2012 election.
So since these states are particularly easy to predict,
we feel pretty comfortable moving forward, making
predictions just for the 45 remaining states.
So the second thing that we notice
is that there are these NA values, which
signify missing data.
So to get a handle on just how many values are missing,
we can use our summary function on the polling data frame.
And what we see is that while for the majority
of our variables, there's actually no missing data,
we see that for the Rasmussen polling data
and also for the SurveyUSA polling data,
there are a decent number of missing values.
So let's take a look at just how we
can handle this missing data.
There are a number of simple approaches
to dealing with missing data.
One would be to delete observations
that are missing at least one variable value.
Unfortunately, in this case, that
would result in throwing away more than 50%
of the observations.
And further, we want to be able to make predictions
for all states, not just for the ones that
report all of their variable values.
Another observation would be to remove the variables that
have missing values, in this case, the Rasmussen
and SurveyUSA variables.
However, we expect Rasmussen and SurveyUSA
to be qualitatively different from aggregate variables,
such as DiffCount and PropR, so we
want to retain them in our data set.
A third approach would be to fill the missing data
points with average values.
So for Rasmussen and SurveyUSA, the average value for a poll
would be very close to zero across all the times
with it reported, which is roughly a tie
between the Democrat and Republican candidate.
However, if PropR is very close to one or zero,
we would expect the Rasmussen or SurveyUSA
values that are currently missing
to be positive or negative, respectively.
This leads to a more complicated approach
called multiple imputation in which we fill in the missing
values based on the non-missing values for an observation.
So for instance, if the Rasmussen variable is reported
and is very negative, then a missing SurveyUSA value
would likely be filled in as a negative value as well.
Just like in the sample.split function,
multiple runs of multiple imputation
will in general result in different missing values being
filled in based on the random seed that is set.
Although multiple imputation is in general
a mathematically sophisticated approach,
we can use it rather easily through pre-existing R
libraries.
We will use the Multiple Imputation
by Chained Equations, or mice package.
So just like we did in lecture with the ROCR package,
we're going to install and then load
a new package, the "mice" package.
So we run install.packages, and we
pass it "mice", which is the name of the package we
want to install.
So you have to select a mirror near you for the installation,
and hopefully everything will go smoothly
and you'll get the package mice installed.
So after it's installed, we still
need to load it so that we can actually use it,
so we do that with the library command.
If you have to use it in the future, all you'll have to do
is run library instead of installing and then running
library.
So for our multiple imputation to be useful,
we have to be able to find out the values of our missing
variables without using the outcome of Republican.
So, what we're going to do here is
we're going to limit our data frame to just
the four polling related variables
before we actually perform multiple imputation.
So we're going to create a new data frame called simple,
and that's just going to be our original polling data
frame limited to Rasmussen, SurveyUSA, PropR,
and DiffCount.

We can take a look at the simple data
frame using the summary command.
What we can see is that we haven't
done anything fancy yet.
We still have our missing values.
All that's changed is now we have
a smaller number of variables in total.
So again, multiple imputation, if you ran it twice,
you would get different values that were filled in.
So, to make sure that everybody following along
gets the same results from imputation,
we're going to set the random seed to a value.
It doesn't really matter what value
we pick, so we'll just pick my favorite number, 144.
And now we're ready to do imputation,
which is just one line.
So we're going to create a new data frame called imputed,
and we're going to use the function complete,
called on the function mice, called on simple.

So the output here shows us that five rounds of imputation
have been run, and now all of the variables
have been filled in.
So there's no more missing values,
and we can see that using the summary function on imputed.
So Rasmussen and SurveyUSA both have no more
of those NA or missing values.
So the last step in this imputation process
is to actually copy the Rasmussen and SurveyUSA
variables back into our original polling data frame, which
has all the variables for the problem.
And we can do that with two simple assignments.
So we'll just copy over to polling$Rasmussen, the value
from the imputed data frame, and then we'll
do the same for the SurveyUSA variable.

And we'll use one final check using summary
on the final polling data frame.
And as we can see, Rasmussen and SurveyUSA
are no longer missing values.
