
In this lecture, we'll be trying to understand sentiment
of tweets about the company Apple.
Apple is a computer company known for its laptops, phones,
tablets, and personal media players.
While Apple has a large number of fans,
they also have a large number of people
who don't like their products.
And they have several competitors.
To better understand public perception,
Apple wants to monitor how people feel over time
and how people receive new announcements.
Our challenge in this lecture is to see if we can correctly
classify tweets as being negative, positive, or neither
about Apple.
To collect the data needed for this task,
we had to perform two steps.
The first was to collect data about tweets from the internet.
Twitter data is publicly available.
And you can collect it through scraping the website
or by using a special interface for programmers
that Twitter provides called an API.
The sender of the tweet might be useful to predict sentiment.
But we'll ignore it to keep our data anonymized.
So we'll just be using the text of the tweet.
Then we need to construct the outcome variable
for these tweets, which means that we have to label them
as positive, negative, or neutral sentiment.
We would like to label thousands of tweets.
And we know that two people might disagree over
the correct classification of a tweet.
So to do this efficiently, one option
is to use the Amazon Mechanical Turk.

So what is the Amazon Mechanical Turk?
It allows people to break tasks down into small components
and then enables them to distribute these tasks online
to be solved by people all over the world.
People can sign up to perform the available tasks for a fee.
As the task creator, we pay the workers
a fixed amount per completed task.
For example, we might pay $0.02 for a single classified tweet.
The Amazon Mechanical Turk serves as a broker
and takes a small cut of the money.
Many of the tasks on the Mechanical Turk
require human intelligence, like classifying
the sentiment of a tweet.
But these tasks may be time consuming
or require building otherwise unneeded capacity
for the creator of the task.
And so it's appealing to outsource the job.
The task that we put on the Amazon Mechanical Turk
was to judge the sentiment expressed
by the following item toward the software company Apple.
The items we gave them were tweets that we had collected.
The workers could pick from the following options
as their response-- strongly negative, negative, neutral,
positive, and strongly positive.
We represented each of these outcomes
as a number on the scale from negative 2 to 2.
We had five workers label each tweet.
The graph on the right shows the distribution
of the number of tweets classified
into each of the categories.
We can see here that the majority of tweets
were classified as neutral, with a small number classified
as strongly negative or strongly positive.

Then, for each tweet, we take the average of the five scores
given by the five workers.
For example, the tweet "LOVE U @APPLE"
was seen as strongly positive by 4 of the workers
and positive by one of the workers.
So it gets a score of 1.8.
The tweet "@apple @twitter Happy Programmers' Day folks!"
was seen as slightly positive on average.
And the tweet "So disappointed in @Apple.
Sold me a Macbook Air that WONT run my apps.
So I have to drive hours to return it.
They won't let me ship it." was seen as pretty negative.
So now we have a bunch of tweets that
are labeled with their sentiment.
But how do we build independent variables
from the text of a tweet to be used to predict the sentiment?
In the next video, we'll discuss a technique
called bag of words that transforms text
into independent variables.
