
When Watson receives a question, the first step
is question analysis.
One of the things Watson tries to figure out in this step
is what the question is looking for.
This is defined as trying to find the Lexical Answer
Type, or LAT, of the question.
The LAT is the word or noun in the question
that specifies the type of answer.
You should be able to replace the LAT with the answer
to complete the sentence.
For example, for the question, "Mozart's last
and perhaps most powerful symphony
shares its name with this planet," the LAT in this case
is "this planet."
If we replace this with the answer "Jupiter,"
it makes sense.
Mozart's last and perhaps most powerful symphony shares
its name with Jupiter.
For the question, "Smaller than only Greenland,
it's the world's second largest island," the LAT is "it's."
If we replace the LAT with the answer "New Guinea,"
it makes sense.
"Smaller than only Greenland, New Guinea
is the world's second largest island."
Unfortunately, the LAT is not "island,"
which would be more descriptive, since the sentence with "New
Guinea" in place of "island" does not make sense.
We can see in these two examples that sometimes the LAT is very
specific, like "this planet," and sometimes it's very vague,
like "it's."
If we know the LAT, we know what to look for.
However, in an analysis of 20,000 questions,
2,500 distinct LATs were found, and 12% of the questions
did not even have an explicit LAT.
They had LATs like "it's."
Furthermore, even the most frequent 200 explicit LATs
cover less than 50% of the questions.
So to enhance the question analysis step,
Watson also performs relation detection
to find relationships among words and decomposition
to split the question into different clues.

The second step in Watson is hypothesis generation.
The goal of this step is to use the question analysis of step
one to produce candidate answers by searching the databases.
In this step several hundred candidate answers
are generated.
For the question, "Mozart's last and perhaps most powerful
symphony shares its name with this planet,"
candidate answers could be Mercury, Earth, and Jupiter.
These are generated using various search techniques.

Then each candidate answer plugged back
into the question in place of the LAT
is considered a hypothesis.
For the question about Mozart's symphony,
hypothesis one would be the question
with "Mercury" in place of "this planet."
Hypothesis two would have "Jupiter"
in place of "this planet."
And hypothesis three would have "Earth"
in place of "this planet."
If the correct answer is not generated at this stage,
Watson has no hope of getting the question right.
Therefore, this step errors on the side
of generating a lot of hypotheses
and leaves it up to the next step
to find the correct answer.
In the next video, we'll discuss how steps three and four
score and rank the hypotheses.
