
In this recitation, we're going to talk
about predictive coding-- an emerging
use of text analytics in the area of criminal justice.
We'll start with the story of Enron, the United States energy
company based out of Houston, Texas that was involved
in a number of electricity production and distribution
markets.
In the early 2000s, Enron was a hot company,
with a market capitalization exceeding $60 billion,
and Forbes magazine ranked it as the most innovative US
company six years in a row.
Now, all that changed in 2001 with the news
of widespread accounting fraud at the firm.
This massive fraud led to Enron's bankruptcy, the largest
ever at the time, and led to Enron's accounting firm, Arthur
Andersen, dissolving.
To this day, Enron remains a symbol
of corporate greed and corruption.
Now, while Enron's collapse stemmed largely
from accounting fraud, the firm also
faced sanctions for its involvement
in the California electricity crisis.
California is the most populous state in the United States.
And in 2000 to 2001, it had a number of power blackouts,
despite having sufficient generating capacity.
It later surfaced that Enron played a key role
in this energy crisis by artificially reducing
power supply to spike prices and then
making a profit from this market instability.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or FERC,
investigated Enron's involvement in the crisis,
and this investigation eventually
led to a $1.52 billion settlement.
FERC's investigation into Enron will
be the topic of today's recitation.
Now, Enron was a huge company, and its corporate servers
contained millions of emails and other electronic files.
Sifting through these documents to find
the ones relevant to an investigation
is no simple task.
In law, this electronic document retrieval process
is called the eDiscovery problem,
and relevant files are called responsive documents.
Traditionally, the eDiscovery problem has been solved
by using keyword search-- in our case, perhaps,
searching for phrases like "electricity bid"
or "energy schedule"-- followed by an expensive
and time-consuming manual review process,
in which attorneys read through thousands of documents
to determine which ones are responsive.
However, predictive coding is a new technique,
in which attorneys manually label some documents
and then use text analytics models trained
on the manually labeled documents
to predict which of the remaining documents
are responsive.
Now, as part of its investigation,
the FERC released hundreds of thousands of emails
from top executives at Enron creating the largest publicly
available set of emails today.
We will use this data set called the Enron Corpus to perform
predictive coding in this recitation.
Our data set contains just two fields--
email, which is the text of the email in question,
and responsive, which is whether the email relates
to energy schedules or bids.
The labels for these emails were made
by attorneys as part of the 2010 text retrieval conference
legal track, a predictive coding competition.
