
After working in R, you often want
to save your work so that you can easily re-run commands
and rebuild models.
There are several ways of doing this,
but the method we recommend is by using
what's called a script file.
Let's open a new script file.
Go to File, New Document, on a Mac, and File, New Script,
on a PC.
This will pop up a blank script file.
You can copy and paste any commands
that you've run in your console into the script file.
For example, say we want to save the table commands we ran.
Let's Copy the first table command
and then Paste it into the script file.
We can also take the first tapply command
we ran, Copy and Paste it into our script file.
Now, if you highlight these lines of code
in the script file and press Command-Enter on a Mac,
and Control-r on a PC, it will run these lines of code
in your R console.
So if you save this file and then reopen it
when you start R next time, you can easily rerun any commands
that you ran in this R session.
A lot of times it's easier to just write
commands in your script file and run them in your console
because then they'll always be saved in your script file.
You can add comments in your script file
by using the pound sign.
If you type pound, and then some comment
describing your script file, and then highlight the whole thing
and press Control-r or Command-Enter,
you'll see that the comment runs in the console,
but nothing happens.
R recognizes this as a comment.
If you want to save the output of your R session
in your console, I recommend just saving it as a text file.
In your console, you can go to file, Save to file,
and this will save your output as a text file.
You won't be able to easily rerun
this in R like the script file, but it
will have the summary output of what you did.
When you close R, it will ask you
if you want to save your workspace.
Make sure you have everything you want in a script file
and then don't worry about saving your workspace.
These are the basics of R. We'll see
a lot more in the rest of this class.
But hopefully you've seen in this lecture
how powerful R can be.
In just one lecture, we performed insightful data
analysis on an interesting data set.