
Claims data offers an expansive view of the patient's health
history.
Specifically, claims data include information
on demographics, medical history, and medications.
They offer insights regarding a patient's risk.
And as I will demonstrate, may reveal indicative signals
and patterns.
We'll use health insurance claims
filed for about 7,000 members from January 2000
until November 2007.
We concentrated on members with the following attributes.
At least five claims with coronary artery disease
diagnosis, at least five claims with hypertension
diagnostic codes, at least 100 total medical claims,
at least five pharmacy claims, and data
from at least five years.
These selections yield patients with a high risk
of heart attack,
and a reasonably rich medical history with continuous
coverage.

Let us discuss how we aggregated this data.
The resulting data sets includes about 20 million health
insurance entries, including individual, medical,
and pharmaceutical records.
Diagnosis, procedures, and drug codes in the data
set comprised tens of thousands of attributes.
The codes were aggregated into groups.
218 diagnosis groups, 180 procedure groups,
538 drug groups.
46 diagnosis groups were considered
by clinicians as possible risk factors for heart attacks.

Let us discuss how we view the data over time.
It is important in this study to view the medical records
chronologically, and to represent a patient's diagnosis
profile over time.
So we record the cost and number of medical claims and hospital
visits by a diagnosis.
All the observations we have span over five years of data.
They were split into 21 periods, each 90 days in length.
We examine nine months of diagnostic history,
leading up to heart attack or no heart attack event,
and align the data to make observations that are date-independent,
while preserving the order of events.
We recorded the diagnostic history in three periods.
Zero to three months before the event,
three to six months before the event,
and six to nine months before the event.

What was the target variable we were trying to predict?
The target prediction variable is the occurrence
of a heart attack.
We define this from a combination of several claims.
Namely, diagnosis of a heart attack,
alongside a trip to the emergency room,
followed by subsequent hospitalization.
Only considering heart attack diagnosis
that are associated with a visit to the emergency room,
and following hospitalization helps
ensure that the target outcome is in fact a heart attack
event.
The target variable is binary.
It is denoted by plus 1 or minus 1
for the occurrence or non-occurrence of a heart
attack in the targeted period of 90 days.

How is the data organized?
There were 147 variables.
Variable one is the patient's identification number,
and variable two is the patient's gender.
There were variables related to the diagnoses group
counts nine, six, and three months before the heart attack
target period.
There were variables related to the total cost nine, six,
and three months before the heart attack target
period, and the final variable 147,
includes the classification of whether the event was a heart
attack or not.

Cost of medical care is a good summary of a person's health.
In our database, the total cost of medical care in the three 90
day periods preceding the heart attack target event ranged from
$0 to $636,000 and approximately 70%
of the overall cost was generated by only 11%
of the population.
This means that the highest patients
with high medical expenses are a very small proportion
of the data, and could skew our final results.
According to the American Medical Association, only 10%
of individuals have projected medical expenses
of approximately $10,000 or greater
per year, which is more than four times greater
than the average projected medical expenses of $2,400
per year.
To lessen the effects of these high-cost outliers,
we divided the data into different cost buckets,
based on the findings of the American Medical Association.
We did not want to have too many cost bins
because the size of the data set.
The table in the slide gives a summary
of the cost bucket partitions.
Patients with expenses over $10,000 in the nine month
period were allocated to cost bucket 3.
Patients with less than $2,000 in expenses
were allocated to cost bucket 1.
And the remaining patients with costs between $2,000 and $10,000
to cost bucket 2.
Please note that the majority of patients, 4,400 out of 6,500,
or 67.5% of all patients fell into the first bucket
of low expenses.