
Recommendation systems are used in many different areas
other than movies.
Jeff Bezos, the CEO of Amazon, said
that, "If I have 3 million customers on the web,
I should have 3 million stores on the web."
The internet allows for mass personalization,
and recommendation systems are a key part of that.
Recommendation systems build models
about users' preferences to personalize the user
experience.
This helps users find items they might not have searched for,
like a new favorite band, an old friend who
uses the same social media network, or a book or song
that they're likely to enjoy.
Recommendation systems are a cornerstone
of these top businesses.
Social networking sites, like Facebook,
music streaming sites, like Pandora, and retail companies,
like Amazon, all provide recommendation systems
for their users.
Both collaborative filtering and content filtering
are used in practice.
Collaborative filtering is used by companies
like Amazon, Facebook, and Google News.
Content filtering is used by companies
like Pandora, Rotten Tomatoes, and See This Next.
And Netflix uses both collaborative filtering
and content filtering.
So now let's go back to the Netflix prize.
29 days after last call was announced, on July 25, 2009,
the team The Ensemble submitted a 10.09% improvement, beating
the 10.05% improvement that was submitted by Bellkor's
Pragmatic Chaos to signal last call.
But by the time Netflix stopped accepting submissions the next
day, Bellkor's Pragmatic Chaos had also submitted a 10.09%
improvement, and The Ensemble had submitted a 10.10%
improvement.
To really test the algorithms, Netflix
tested them on a private test set
that the teams had never seen before.
This is the true test of predictive ability.
On September 18, 2009, Netflix announced that the winning team
was Bellkor's Pragmatic Chaos.
They won the competition and the $1 million grand prize.
Recommendation systems provide a significant edge
to many companies.
In today's digital age, businesses often have hundreds
of thousands of items to offer their customers,
whether they're movies, songs , or people they might know
on Facebook.
Excellent recommendation systems can make or break
these businesses.
Clustering algorithms, which are tailored
to find similar customers or similar items,
form the backbone of many of these recommendation systems.
Clustering also has many other interesting applications.
In the next lecture, we'll see how clustering
can be used to improve the predictive ability
of classification methods.