
In this lecture, we'll be using data from MovieLens
to explain clustering and perform content filtering.
movielens.org is a movie recommendation website
run by the GroupLens research lab
at the University of Minnesota.
They collect user preferences about movies
and do collaborative filtering to make recommendations
to users, based on the similarities between users.
We'll use their movie database to do content filtering
using a technique called clustering.
First, let's discuss what data we have.
Movies in the MovieLens data set are categorized
as belonging to different genres.
There are 18 different genres as well as an unknown category.
The genres include crime, musical, mystery,
and children's.
Each movie may belong to many different genres.
So a movie could be classified as drama, adventure,
and sci-fi.
The question we want to answer is, can we systematically
find groups of movies with similar sets of genres?
To answer this question, we'll use a method called clustering.
Clustering is different from the other analytics methods
we've covered so far.
It's called an unsupervised learning method.
This means that we're just trying
to segment the data into similar groups,
instead of trying to predict an outcome.
In this image on the slide, based
on the locations of points, we've
divided them into three clusters-- a blue cluster,
a red cluster, and a yellow cluster.
This is the goal of clustering-- to put each data
point into a group with similar values in the data.
A clustering algorithm does not predict anything.
However, clustering can be used to improve predictive methods.
You can cluster the data into similar groups
and then build a predictive model for each group.
This can often improve the accuracy of predictive methods.
But as a warning, be careful not to over-fit your model
to the training set.
This works best for large data sets.
There are many different algorithms for clustering.
They differ in what makes a cluster
and how the clusters are found.
In this class, we'll cover hierarchical clustering
and K-means clustering.
In this lecture, we'll discuss hierarchical clustering.
And in the next lecture, we'll discuss K-means clustering.
You'll learn how to create clusters using either method
in R. There are other clustering methods also,
but hierarchical and K-means are two
of the most popular methods.
To cluster data points, we need to compute
how similar the points are.
This is done by computing the distance between points, which
we'll discuss in the next video.