
Let us see what we learned about the patterns that emerge.
We will show that the clusters are interpretable
and reveal unique patterns of diagnostic history
among the population.
We selected six patterns to present in this lecture--
Cluster 1, 6, and 7, in Cost Bucket 2,
and Clusters 4, 5, and 10, in Cost Bucket 3.

The first pattern shows the occurrence of chest pain
three months before the heart attack.
Note that the red dots depict the visits per diagnosis
for patients in Cluster 1-- this is, we think,
Bucket 2-- and the blue dots depict the visits
per diagnosis for patients in Bucket 2 throughout.
Note the very significant increase
for visits related to chest pains
three months before the event.
About 17, three months before for the red patients,
and about 1 and 1/2 visits for the blue patients.

The next pattern reveals an increasing occurrence
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD, for short.
Patients from Cluster 7 in Bucket 2
have regular doctor visits for COPD.
Note that nine months before, we have
4 and 1/2 visits versus 0.5 visits.
Six months before, we have almost 7 visits versus 1/2
a visit, and three months before, we
have 9 visits versus 1/2 a visit for COPD,
so a clear increasing pattern.
The next pattern shows gradually increasing occurrence
of anemia.
The red line shows the patients in Cluster 4
increasingly visit the doctor for anemia from nine months
on before the event.
Nine months before, members have an average of 9 visits
to the doctor for anemia.

This increases to an average of 11 visits six months
before the event, and then an average of 15
visits three months before the event, a clear increasing
pattern.

The final pattern shows the occurrence of diabetes
as a pattern for heart attacks.
It is well known that both types 1 and 2
diabetes are associated with accelerated atherosclerosis,
one of the main causes of myocardial infarction-- heart
attacks, that is.
Well known diagnoses associated with heart attacks,
such as diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia,
characterize many of the patterns of the consistency
of care throughout all of the cost buckets and clustering
models.

You observe a difference, here, of the number
of visits for diabetes for the population
that had the event versus the average population.