IMPORTANT NOTE: This problem is optional, and will not count towards your grade. We have created this problem to give you extra practice with the topics covered in this unit.

FORECASTING ELANTRA SALES (OPTIONAL)

An important application of linear regression is understanding sales. Consider a company that produces and sells a product. In a given period, if the company produces more units than how many consumers will buy, the company will not earn money on the unsold units and will incur additional costs due to having to store those units in inventory before they can be sold. If it produces fewer units than how many consumers will buy, the company will earn less than it potentially could have earned. Being able to predict consumer sales, therefore, is of first order importance to the company.

In this problem, we will try to predict monthly sales of the Hyundai Elantra in the United States. The Hyundai Motor Company is a major automobile manufacturer based in South Korea. The Elantra is a car model that has been produced by Hyundai since 1990 and is sold all over the world, including the United States. We will build a linear regression model to predict monthly sales using economic indicators of the United States as well as Google search queries.

The file elantra.csv contains data for the problem. Each observation is a month, from January 2010 to February 2014. For each month, we have the following variables:

Month = the month of the year for the observation (1 = January, 2 = February, 3 = March, ...).
Year = the year of the observation.
ElantraSales = the number of units of the Hyundai Elantra sold in the United States in the given month.
Unemployment = the estimated unemployment percentage in the United States in the given month.
Queries = a (normalized) approximation of the number of Google searches for "hyundai elantra" in the given month.
CPI_energy = the monthly consumer price index (CPI) for energy for the given month.
CPI_all = the consumer price index (CPI) for all products for the given month; this is a measure of the magnitude of the prices paid by consumer households for goods and services (e.g., food, clothing, electricity, etc.).
PROBLEM 1 - LOADING THE DATA  
Load the data set. Split the data set into training and testing sets as follows: place all observations for 2012 and earlier in the training set, and all observations for 2013 and 2014 into the testing set.

How many observations are in the training set?

 36 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 2.1 - A LINEAR REGRESSION MODEL  
Build a linear regression model to predict monthly Elantra sales using Unemployment, CPI_all, CPI_energy and Queries as the independent variables. Use all of the training set data to do this.

What is the model R-squared? Note: In this problem, we will always be asking for the "Multiple R-Squared" of the model.

 0.4282 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 5 submissions
PROBLEM 2.2 - SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES  
How many variables are significant, or have levels that are significant? Use 0.10 as your p-value cutoff.

 0  1 1 - incorrect  2  3  4
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
PROBLEM 2.3 - COEFFICIENTS  
What is the coefficient of the Unemployment variable?

 -3179.90 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 2.4 - INTERPRETING THE COEFFICIENT  
What is the interpretation of this coefficient?

 For an increase of 1 in predicted Elantra sales, Unemployment decreases by approximately 3000. For an increase of 1 in predicted Elantra sales, Unemployment decreases by approximately 3000. - incorrect  For an increase of 1 in Unemployment, the prediction of Elantra sales decreases by approximately 3000.  If Unemployment increases by 1, then Elantra sales will decrease by approximately 3000; Hyundai should keep unemployment down (by creating jobs in the US or lobbying the US government) if it wishes to increase its sales.  For an increase of 1 in Unemployment, then predicted Elantra sales will essentially stay the same, since the coefficient is not statistically significant.
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
PROBLEM 3.1 - MODELING SEASONALITY  
Our model R-Squared is relatively low, so we would now like to improve our model. In modeling demand and sales, it is often useful to model seasonality. Seasonality refers to the fact that demand is often cyclical/periodic in time. For example, in countries with different seasons, demand for warm outerwear (like jackets and coats) is higher in fall/autumn and winter (due to the colder weather) than in spring and summer. (In contrast, demand for swimsuits and sunscreen is higher in the summer than in the other seasons.) Another example is the "back to school" period in North America: demand for stationary (pencils, notebooks and so on) in late July and all of August is higher than the rest of the year due to the start of the school year in September.

In our problem, since our data includes the month of the year in which the units were sold, it is feasible for us to incorporate monthly seasonality. From a modeling point of view, it may be reasonable that the month plays an effect in how many Elantra units are sold.

To incorporate the seasonal effect due to the month, build a new linear regression model that predicts monthly Elantra sales using Month as well as Unemployment, CPI_all, CPI_energy and Queries. Do not modify the training and testing data frames before building the model.

What is the model R-Squared?

 0.4344 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 3.2 - EFFECT OF ADDING A NEW VARIABLE  
Which of the following best describes the effect of adding Month?

 The model is better because the R-squared has increased.  The model is not better because the adjusted R-squared has gone down and none of the variables (including the new one) are very significant.  The model is better because the p-values of the four previous variables have decreased (they have become more significant).  The model is not better because it has more variables. The model is not better because it has more variables. - incorrect
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
PROBLEM 3.3 - UNDERSTANDING THE MODEL  
Let us try to understand our model.

In the new model, given two monthly periods that are otherwise identical in Unemployment, CPI_all, CPI_energy and Queries, what is the absolute difference in predicted Elantra sales given that one period is in January and one is in March?

 221.38 - correct  
In the new model, given two monthly periods that are otherwise identical in Unemployment, CPI_all, CPI_energy and Queries, what is the absolute difference in predicted Elantra sales given that one period is in January and one is in May?

 442.76 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 3.4 - NUMERIC VS. FACTORS  
You may be experiencing an uneasy feeling that there is something not quite right in how we have modeled the effect of the calendar month on the monthly sales of Elantras. If so, you are right. In particular, we added Month as a variable, but Month is an ordinary numeric variable. In fact, we must convert Month to a factor variable before adding it to the model.

What is the best explanation for why we must do this?

 By converting Month to a factor variable, we will effectively increase the number of coefficients we need to estimate, which will boost our model's R-Squared.  By modeling Month as a factor variable, the effect of each calendar month is not restricted to be linear in the numerical coding of the month. By modeling Month as a factor variable, the effect of each calendar month is not restricted to be linear in the numerical coding of the month. - correct  Within the data frame, Month is stored in R's Date format, causing errors in how the coefficient is estimated.
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
PROBLEM 4.1 - A NEW MODEL  
Re-run the regression with the Month variable modeled as a factor variable. (Create a new variable that models the Month as a factor (using the as.factor function) instead of overwriting the current Month variable. We'll still use the numeric version of Month later in the problem.)

What is the model R-Squared?

 0.8193 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 5 submissions
PROBLEM 4.2 - SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES  
Which variables are significant, or have levels that are significant? Use 0.10 as your p-value cutoff. (Select all that apply.)

 Month (the factor version)  CPI_all  CPI_energy  Unemployment  Queries
Month (the factor version), CPI_all, CPI_energy, Unemployment, - correct
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 2 submissions
PROBLEM 5.1 - MULTICOLINEARITY  
Another peculiar observation about the regression is that the sign of the Queries variable has changed. In particular, when we naively modeled Month as a numeric variable, Queries had a positive coefficient. Now, Queries has a negative coefficient. Furthermore, CPI_energy has a positive coefficient -- as the overall price of energy increases, we expect Elantra sales to increase, which seems counter-intuitive (if the price of energy increases, we'd expect consumers to have less funds to purchase automobiles, leading to lower Elantra sales).

As we have seen before, changes in coefficient signs and signs that are counter to our intuition may be due to a multicolinearity problem. To check, compute the correlations of the variables in the training set.

Which of the following variables is CPI_energy highly correlated with? Select all that apply. (Include only variables where the absolute value of the correlation exceeds 0.6. For the purpose of this question, treat Month as a numeric variable, not a factor variable.)

 Month  Unemployment  Queries  CPI_all
Unemployment, Queries, CPI_all, - correct
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 2 submissions
PROBLEM 5.2 - CORRELATIONS  
Which of the following variables is Queries highly correlated with? Again, compute the correlations on the training set. Select all that apply. (Include only variables where the absolute value of the correlation exceeds 0.6. For the purpose of this question, treat Month as a numeric variable, not a factor variable.)

 Month  Unemployment  CPI_energy  CPI_all
CPI_energy, - incorrect
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 2 of 2 submissions
PROBLEM 6.1 - A REDUCED MODEL  
Let us now simplify our model (the model using the factor version of the Month variable). We will do this by iteratively removing variables, one at a time. Remove the variable with the highest p-value (i.e., the least statistically significant variable) from the model. Repeat this until there are no variables that are insignificant or variables for which all of the factor levels are insignificant. Use a threshold of 0.10 to determine whether a variable is significant.

Which variables, and in what order, are removed by this process?

 CPI_energy, then Queries  Queries Queries - correct  Queries, then CPI_energy  Queries, then CPI_energy, then CPI_all
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
PROBLEM 6.2 - TEST SET PREDICTIONS  
Using the model from Problem 6.1, make predictions on the test set. What is the sum of squared errors of the model on the test set?

 190757747 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 6.3 - COMPARING TO A BASELINE  
What would the baseline method predict for all observations in the test set? Remember that the baseline method we use predicts the average outcome of all observations in the training set.

 14460 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 6.4 - TEST SET R-SQUARED  
What is the test set R-Squared?

 0.2719768 - incorrect  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 3 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 6.5 - ABSOLUTE ERRORS  
What is the largest absolute error that we make in our test set predictions?

 7491.0 - correct  
SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions
PROBLEM 6.6 - MONTH OF LARGEST ERROR  
In which period (Month,Year pair) do we make the largest absolute error in our prediction?

 01/2013  02/2013  03/2013 03/2013 - correct  04/2013  05/2013  06/2013  07/2013  08/2013  09/2013  10/2013  11/2013  12/2013  01/2014  02/2014
 SHOW ANSWER  You have used 1 of 3 submissions