
In the previous video, we created a linear regression
model in R. Using the summary function,
we were able to see the coefficients as well
as some other information.
The output of the Coefficients section of the summary function
is shown here.
The independent variables are listed on the left.
The Estimate column gives the coefficients for the intercept
and for each of the independent variables in our model.
The remaining columns help us to determine
if a variable should be included in the model,
or if its coefficient is significantly different from 0.
A coefficient of 0 means that the value
of the independent variable does not
change our prediction for the dependent variable.
If a coefficient is not significantly different from 0,
then we should probably remove the variable from our model
since it's not helping to predict the dependent variable.

The standard error column gives a measure
of how much the coefficient is likely to vary
from the estimate value.
The t value is the estimate divided by the standard error.
It will be negative if the estimate
is negative and positive if the estimate is positive.
The larger the absolute value of the t value, the more likely
the coefficient is to be significant.
So we want independent variables with a large absolute value
in this column.
The last column of numbers gives a measure of how plausible
it is that the coefficient is actually 0, given
the data we used to build the model.
The less plausible it is, or the smaller the probability number
in this column, the less likely it
is that our coefficient estimate is actually 0.
This number will be large if the absolute value of the t value
is small, and it will be small if the absolute value of the t
value is large.
We want independent variables with small values
in this column.
This is a lot of information, but the easiest way
in R to determine if a variable is significant
is to look at the stars at the end of each row.
The star coding scheme is explained
at the bottom of the Coefficients table.
Three stars is the highest level of significance
and corresponds to a probability value less than 0.001,
or the smallest possible probabilities.
Two stars is also very significant and corresponds
to a probability between 0.001 and 0.01.
One star is still significant and corresponds
to a probability between 0.01 and 0.05.
A period, or dot, means that the coefficient is almost
significant and corresponds to a probability between 0.05
and 0.10.
When we ask you to list the significant variables
in a problem, we will usually not include these.
Nothing at the end of a row means that the variable is not
significant in the model.
If we look at the stars at the end
of each row in this Coefficients table,
we can see that Age and FrancePopulation are
both insignificant in our model.
Let's now switch to R and see if we
can improve our linear regression model.
In the previous video, we built a linear regression model,
called model3, that used all of our independent variables
to predict the dependent variable, Price.
In our R Console, we can see the summary output of this model.
As we just learned, both Age and FrancePopulation
are insignificant in our model.
Because of this, we should consider
removing these variables from our model.
Let's start by just removing FrancePopulation,
which we intuitively don't expect
to be predictive of wine price anyway.
We'll create a new model, called model4,
and again, we'll use the lm function
to predict Price, using as independent variables AGST,
HarvestRain, WinterRain, and Age.
Just like before, we'll use the data set
wine to build our model.
Let's take a look at the summary of this new model, model4.

We can see that the R-squared, for this model, is 0.8286
and our Adjusted R-squared is 0.79.
If we scroll back up in our R Console,
we can see that for model3, the R-squared was 0.8294,
and the Adjusted R-squared was 0.7845.
So this model is just as strong, if not stronger,
than the previous model because our Adjusted R-squared actually
increased by removing FrancePopulation.
If we look at each of our independent variables
in the new model, and the stars, we
can see that something a little strange happened.
Before, Age was not significant at all in our model.
But now, Age has two stars, meaning
that it's very significant in this new model.
This is due to something called multicollinearity.
Age and FrancePopulation are what we call highly correlated.
We'll learn more about correlation
and multicollinearity in the next video.
