
The goal of a baseball team is to make the playoffs.
The A's approach was to get to the playoffs
by using analytics.
We'll first show how we can predict whether or not
a team will make the playoffs by knowing how many games they
won in the regular season.
We'll then use linear regression to predict
how many games a team will win using
the difference between runs scored and runs allowed,
or opponent runs.
We'll then use linear regression again
to predict the number of runs a team will score
using batting statistics, and the number of
runs a team will allow using fielding and pitching
statistics.
We'll start by figuring out how many games a team needs
to win to make the playoffs, and then
how many more runs a team needs to score than their opponent
to win that many games.

So our first question is: how many games does a team
need to win in the regular season
to make it to the playoffs?
In Moneyball, Paul DePodesta reduced the regular season
to a math problem.
He judged that it would take 95 wins for the A's to make it
to the playoffs.
Let's see if we can verify this using data.

This graph uses data from all teams and seasons
from 1996 to 2001.
There's a point on the graph for every team and season pair.
They're sorted on the x-axis by number of wins
and on the y-axis by team.
The gray points correspond to the teams that did not
make the playoffs, and the red points
correspond to the teams that did make the playoffs.
This graph shows us that historically,
if a team won 95 or more games, or is
on the right side of this line, then they almost all
made it to the playoffs.
But if a team only won, say, 85 or more games,
then they were likely to make it to the playoffs
but it wasn't as certain.
And if a team won, say, 100 or more games,
than they definitely made it to the playoffs.
So this plot shows us that historically,
if a team won 95 or more games, then
they had a strong chance of making it
to the playoffs, which confirms Paul DePodesta's claim.

So we know that a team wants to win 95 or more games,
but how does a team win games?
Well, they score more runs than their opponent does.
We just need to figure out how many more.
The A's calculated that they needed
to score 135 more runs than they allowed
during the regular season to expect to win 95 games.
Let's see if we can verify this using linear regression in R.
In our R console, let's start by loading our data.
We'll call our data frame baseball,
and use the read.csv function to read in the data file
baseball.csv.

Don't forget to make sure you're in the folder on your computer
containing this file first.
We can look at the structure of our data
using the str function.

This data set includes an observation
for every team and year pair from 1962 to 2012
for all seasons with 162 games.
We have 15 variables in our data set, including Runs Scored, RS,
Runs Allowed, RA, and Wins, W. We also
have several other variables that we'll
use when building models later on in the lecture.
Since we're confirming the claims made in Moneyball,
we want to build models using data Paul DePodesta had
in 2002, so let's start by subsetting our data
to only include the years before 2002.
We'll call our new data frame moneyball,
and we'll use the subset function
to take a subset of baseball and only take
the observations for which Year is less than 2002.
If we take a look at the structure of moneyball,
we can see that we now have 902 observations of the same 15
variables.
So we want to build a linear regression equation
to predict wins using the difference between runs
scored and runs allowed.
To make this a little easier, let's start
by creating a new variable.
We'll call it moneyball$RD, for run difference,
and set it equal to moneyball$RS, runs scored,
minus moneyball$RA, runs allowed.
If we take a look at the structure of moneyball again,
we can now see that we have a new variable, RD,
at the bottom of our variable list.
Now, before we build the linear regression equation,
let's visually check to see if there's
a linear relationship between Run Difference and Wins.
We'll do that by creating a scatter plot with the plot
function.
On the x-axis, we'll put RD, Run Difference, and on the y-axis,
we'll put W, Wins.

This scatter plot shows us that there's
a very strong linear relationship between these two
variables, which is a good sign for our linear regression
equation.
So now let's go back to our R console
and we'll create our linear regression
model, which we'll call WinsReg, and we'll
use the lm function to predict W, or Wins, using
the independent variable RD, and we'll
use the data set moneyball.

We can take a look at the summary of our regression
equation using the summary function, which shows us
that RD is very significant with three stars,
and the R-squared of our model is 0.88.
So we have a strong model to predict wins
using the difference between runs scored and runs allowed.
Now, let's see if we can use this model
to confirm the claim made in Moneyball that a team needs
to score at least 135 more runs than they
allow to win at least 95 games.

Our Coefficients table tells us that our regression equation
is Wins equals the intercept term, 80.8814,
plus the coefficient for run difference, 0.1058,
times RD, or Run Difference.
We want Wins to be greater than or equal to 95
so that the A's make it to the playoffs.
This will be true if and only if our regression equation
is greater than or equal to 95.
So we want 80.8814 plus 0.1058 times Run Difference, or RD,
to be greater than or equal to 95.
By rearranging this equation, we can
see that this will be true if and only if Run Difference is
greater than or equal to 95 minus the intercept term,
80.8814, divided by 0.1058, the coefficient for Run Difference.
This is equal to 133.4.
So this tells us that if the run difference of a team
is greater than or equal to 133.4,
then we predict that the team will win at least 95 games.
This is very close to the claim made in Moneyball
that a team needs to score at least 135 more runs than they
allow to win at least 95 games.
So by using linear regression and data,
we were able to verify Paul DePodesta's claim.