
In the previous video, we used data and linear regression
to show that if a team scores at least 135
more runs than their opponent throughout the regular season,
then we predict that the team will win at least 95 games
and make the playoffs.
This means that we need to know how many runs a team will
score, which we'll show can be predicted
with batting statistics, and how many runs a team will allow,
which we'll show can be predicted
using fielding and pitching statistics.

Let's start by creating a linear regression
model to predict runs scored.
The Oakland A's were interested in answering the question: how
does a team score more runs?
They discovered that two particular baseball statistics
were very predictive of runs scored:
on-base percentage, or OBP, and slugging percentage, or SLG.
On-base percentage is the percentage
of time a player gets on base, including walks.
Slugging percentage measures how far
a player gets around the bases on his turn,
and measures the power of a hitter.
Most baseball teams and experts have historically
focused on batting average, which
measures how often a hitter gets on base by hitting the ball.
It's similar to on-base percentage but excludes walks.
The Oakland A's claimed that on-base percentage was
the most important statistic for predicting runs.
That it doesn't matter if a player gets on base
by hitting the ball or walking, just that they got on base.
They also claimed that slugging percentage was important,
and batting average was overvalued.
Let's see if we can use linear regression in R,
to verify which baseball statistics are
important for predicting runs scored.
In the previous video, we created
our data set and called it moneyball.
In our R Console, let's take a look
at the structure of our data, again, using the str function.

Our data set has many variables, including runs scored, RS,
on-base percentage, OBP, slugging percentage, SLG,
and batting average, BA.
We want to see if we can use linear regression to predict
runs scored, RS, using these three hitting statistics--
on-base percentage, slugging percentage and batting average.
So let's build a linear regression equation.
We'll call it RunsReg, and we'll use the lm function
to predict runs scored, RS, using OBP, SLG, and BA.
We'll use the data set moneyball.

If we take a look at the summary of our regression equation,
we can see that all of our independent variables
are significant, and our R-squared is 0.93.
But if we look at our coefficients,
we can see that the coefficient for batting average
is negative.
This implies that, all else being equal,
a team with a lower batting average
will score more runs, which is a little counterintuitive.
What's going on here is a case of multicollinearity.
These three hitting statistics are highly correlated,
so it's hard to interpret the coefficients of our model.
Let's try removing batting average, the variable
with the least significance, to see what happens to our model.
So let's hit the up arrow twice, and then delete BA
from our model, and hit Enter.
And then, hit the up arrow twice again to look at the new model.
We can see that our independent variables are still
very significant, the coefficients are both positive
as we expect, and our R-squared is still about 0.93.
So this model is simpler, with only two independent variables,
and has about the same R-squared.
Overall a better model.
You could experiment and see that if we'd
removed on-base percentage or slugging percentage instead
of batting average, our R-squared would have decreased.
If we look at the coefficients of our model,
we can see that on-base percentage has a larger
coefficient than slugging percentage.
Since these variables are on about the same scale,
this tells us that on-base percentage is probably
worth more than slugging percentage.
So by using linear regression, we're
able to verify the claims made in Moneyball:
that batting average is overvalued,
on-base percentage is the most important, and slugging
percentage is important for predicting runs scored.
We can create a very similar model
to predict runs allowed, or opponent runs.
This model uses pitching statistics: opponents
on-base percentage, or OOBP, and opponents slugging percentage,
or OSLG.
These statistics are computed in the same way
as on-base percentage and slugging percentage,
but they use the actions of the opposing batters
against our team's pitcher and fielders.
Using our data set in R, we can build a linear regression model
to predict runs allowed, using opponents on-base percentage
and opponents slugging percentage.
This is, again, a very strong model with an R-squared value
of 0.91, and both variables are significant.
The key message here is that simple models, using
only a couple independent variables,
can be constructed to answer some
of the most important questions in baseball.
In the next video, we'll show how
we can apply these models to predict whether or not
a team will make the playoffs.