
The goal of a basketball team is similar to that of a baseball
team, making the playoffs.
So how many games does a team need
to win in order to make the playoffs?
Recall that in the lecture we found this number
by looking at a graph.
Here in R, let's use the table command
to figure this out for the NBA.
So that's just table(NBA$W, NBA$Playoffs).

So our table pops up.
Let's scroll to the top so we see what's going on.
OK so as we typed in, we've got the number of wins
here as the rows.
And 0 if a team didn't make the playoffs, 1 if a team did
make the playoffs in the columns.
So for all of our data, for example,
consider all the times that a team won 17 games.
So this happened 11 times in total.
And all 11 times the teams didn't make it to the playoffs
when they won 17 games.
Let's scroll down and look at a much higher number
for contrast.
For example, 61 wins.
If a team won 61 games then 10 of those times they made it
to the playoffs, and 0 times they didn't.
So it seems like if you win 61 games
you are definitely going to make it to the playoffs.
But I'm sure we can find a much better threshold.
Let's take a look at the table, say around the middle section.

OK, so here we can see that a team who
wins say about 35 games or fewer almost never
makes it to the playoffs.
We see a lot of 0s and 1s in this column up until 35.
After 35 we start seeing some numbers over here.
So teams are starting to make it to the playoffs.
And if we scroll down, we see that after about 45 wins,
teams almost always make it to the playoffs.
We see very few 1s and 0s in the category of not making it.
So it seems like a good goal would
be to try to win about 42 games.
If a team can win about 42 games then
they have a very good chance of making it to the playoffs.

So in basketball, games are won by scoring more points
than the other team.
Can we use the difference between points scored
and points allowed throughout the regular season in order
to predict the number of games that a team will win?
Let's give it a try.
First we add a variable that is the difference between points
scored and points allowed.
Let's call this NBA$PTSdiff.

And that's just the difference between points scored,
which is PTS, and points allowed, which
is oppPTS.

All right, so we've created our variable.
Let's first make a scatter plot to see
if it looks like there's a linear relationship
between the number of wins that a team wins
and the point difference.
So this is easy to do just with the plot command.
NBA$PTSdiff and NBA$W.
So our graph pops up and it looks
like there's an incredibly strong linear relationship
between these two variables.
So it seems like linear regression
is going to be a good way to predict how many wins
a team will have given the point difference.
Let's try to verify this.

So we're going to have PTSdiff
as our independent variable in our regression,
and W for wins as the dependent variable.
So let's call this WinsReg.

And we just use the lm command as before, regressing W
on the PTSdiff and using the NBA data.
All right, so we've created our regression.
Let's take a look at the summary.

OK, so the first thing that we notice
is that we've got very significant variables
over here.
And an R squared of 0.9423, which is very high.
And this is verifying the scatter plot
we saw before that there's a very strong linear relationship
between the wins and the points difference.

So let's write down the regression
equation that we found.
We see that the number of wins, W, is equal to 41.
That's coming from the coefficient estimate
for the intercept.
Plus 0.0326*PTSdiff.
And that 0.0326 is coming from the coefficient estimate
for PTSdiff.
So we saw earlier with the table that a team
would want to win about at least 42 games
in order to have a good chance of making it to the playoffs.
So what does this mean in terms of their points difference?
Well, we can calculate it.
If we want this to be greater than or equal to 42,
that means that the PTSdiff
would need to be greater than or equal to 42 minus 41
divided by 0.0326.
So if we actually do that calculation,
we see that this is equal to 30.67.
So we need to score at least 31 more points
than we allow in order to win at least 42 games.
