
So can a CART model actually predict Supreme Court case
outcomes better than a group of experts?
Martin and his colleagues used 628 previous Supreme Court
cases between 1994 and 2001 to build their model.
They made predictions for the 68 cases
that would be decided in October, 2002,
before the term started.
Their model had two stages of CART trees.
The first stage involved making predictions
using two CART trees.
One to predict a unanimous liberal decision and one
to predict a unanimous conservative decision.
If the trees gave conflicting responses or both predicted no,
then they moved on to the next stage.
It turns out that about 50% of Supreme Court cases
result in a unanimous decision,
so this was a nice first step to detect the easier cases.
The second stage consisted of predicting
the decision of each individual justice,
and then use the majority decision of all nine justices
as a final prediction for the case.
In this lecture, we constructed the CART tree
for Justice Stevens.
Here's a different tree, this one for Justice O'Connor.
The first split is whether or not
the lower court decision is liberal.
If yes, then we predict that she will reverse the case.
This makes sense because Justice O'Connor is generally
viewed as a conservative judge.
On the other hand, if the lower court decision is conservative,
we check for the circuit court of origin.
If it's the second, third, DC, or federal court,
we predict that she will affirm the case.
If it's not one of these courts, we move on to the next split.
The remaining two splits are for the respondent
and the primary issue.
Here's another tree, this one for Justice Souter.
This shows an unusual property of the CART trees
that Martin and his colleagues developed.
They use predictions for some trees
as independent variables for other trees.
In this tree, the first split is whether or not
Justice Ginsburg's predicted decision is liberal.
So we have to run Justice Ginsburg's CART tree first,
see what the prediction is,
and then use that as input for Justice Souter's tree.
If Justice Ginsburg's predicted decision is liberal
and the lower court decision is liberal,
then we predict that Justice Souter will affirm the case.
But if the lower court decision is conservative,
then we predict that Justice Souter will reverse the case.
On the other side of the tree, if Justice Ginsburg's
predicted decision is conservative,
but the lower court decision is liberal,
then we predict that Justice Souter will reverse the case.
But if the lower court decision is conservative,
then we predict that Justice Souter will affirm the case.
In summary, if we predict that Justice Ginsburg will
make a liberal decision, then Justice Souter
will probably make a liberal decision too.
But if we predict that Justice Ginsburg will
make a conservative decision, then we
predict that Justice Souter will probably
make a conservative decision too.

Martin and his colleagues also recruited 83 legal experts,
71 academics, and 12 attorneys.
38 had previously clerked for a Supreme Court Justice,
33 were chaired professors, and five
were current or former law school deans.
So this was really a dream team of experts.
Additionally, the experts were only
asked to predict within their area of expertise.
So not all experts predicted all cases,
but there was more than one expert making predictions
for each case.
When making their predictions, the experts
were allowed to consider any source of information,
but they were not allowed to communicate
with each other regarding the predictions.
For the 68 cases in October 2002,
the predictions were made, and at the end of the month
the results were computed.
For predicting the overall decision that
was made by the Supreme Court, the models
had an accuracy of 75%, while the experts only
had an accuracy of 59%.
So the models had a significant edge over the experts
in predicting the overall case outcomes.
However, when the predictions were
run for individual justices, the model and the experts
performed very similarly.
For some justices, the model performed better,
and for some justices, the experts performed better.
Being able to predict Supreme Court decisions
is very valuable to firms, politicians,
and non-governmental organizations.
We saw in this lecture that a model that
predicts overall Supreme Court decisions is both more
accurate than experts and can be run much faster than experts
can make their predictions.
The CART models that we built were
based on very high level components of the cases,
compared to the experts who can process
much more detailed and complex information.
This example really shows the edge
that analytics can provide in traditionally qualitative
applications.
