
Let's now see how the baseline method used by D2Hawkeye
would perform on this data set.
The baseline method would predict
that the cost bucket for a patient in 2009
will be the same as it was in 2008.
So let's create a classification matrix to compute the accuracy
for the baseline method on the test set.
So we'll use the table function, where the actual outcomes are
ClaimsTest$bucket2009, and our predictions are
ClaimsTest$bucket2008.
The accuracy is the sum of the diagonal, the observations that
were classified correctly, divided
by the total number of observations in our test set.
So we want to add up 110138 + 10721 + 2774 + 1539 + 104.
And we want to divide by the total number
of observations in this table, or the number of rows
in ClaimsTest.

So the accuracy of the baseline method is 0.68.
Now how about the penalty error?
To compute this, we need to first create a penalty matrix
in R. Keep in mind that we'll put
the actual outcomes on the left, and the predicted outcomes
on the top.
So we'll call it PenaltyMatrix, which
will be equal to a matrix object in R.
And then we need to give the numbers
that should fill up the matrix: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.
That'll be the first row.
And then 2, 0, 1, 2, 3.
That'll be the second row.
4, 2, 0, 1, 2 for the third row.
6, 4, 2, 0, 1 for the fourth row.
And finally, 8, 6, 4, 2, 0 for the fifth row.
And then after the parentheses, type a comma,
and then byrow = TRUE, and then add nrow = 5.
Close the parentheses, and hit Enter.
So what did we just create?
Type PenaltyMatrix and hit Enter.

So with the previous command, we filled up our matrix row
by row.
The actual outcomes are on the left,
and the predicted outcomes are on the top.
So as we saw in the slides, the worst outcomes
are when we predict a low cost bucket,
but the actual outcome is a high cost bucket.
We still give ourselves a penalty
when we predict a high cost bucket
and it's actually a low cost bucket, but it's not as bad.
So now to compute the penalty error of the baseline method,
we can multiply our classification matrix
by the penalty matrix.
So go ahead and hit the Up arrow to get back
to where you created the classification
matrix with the table function.
And we're going to surround the entire table function
by as.matrix to convert it to a matrix
so that we can multiply it by our penalty matrix.
So now at the end, close the parentheses
and then multiply by PenaltyMatrix and hit Enter.
So what this does is it takes each number
in the classification matrix and multiplies it
by the corresponding number in the penalty matrix.
So now to compute the penalty error,
we just need to sum it up and divide
by the number of observations in our test set.
So scroll up once, and then we'll
just surround our entire previous command
by the sum function.

And we'll divide by the number of rows in ClaimsTest
and hit Enter.
So the penalty error for the baseline method is 0.74.
In the next video, our goal will be
to create a CART model that has an accuracy higher than 68%
and a penalty error lower than 0.74.
