
Let's see how regression trees do.
We'll first load the rpart library
and also load the rpart plotting library.
We build a regression tree in the same way
we would build a classification tree, using the rpart command.

We predict MEDV as a function of latitude and longitude,
using the boston dataset.

If we now plot the tree using the prp command, which
is defined in rpart.plot, we can see it makes a lot of splits
and is a little bit hard to interpret.
But the important thing is to look at the leaves.
In a classification tree, the leaves
would be the classification we assign
that these splits would apply to.
But in regression trees, we instead predict the number.
That number is the average of the median house
prices in that bucket or leaf.
So let's see what that means in practice.
So we'll plot again the latitude of the points.

And we'll again plot the points with above median prices.
I just scrolled up from my command history to do that.
Now we want to predict what the tree thinks
is above median, just like we did with linear regression.
So we'll say the fitted values we
can get from using the predict command on the tree we just
built.

And we can do another points command,
just like we did before.
The fitted values are greater than 21.2, the color is blue,
and the character is a dollar sign.

Now we see that we've done a much better job
than linear regression was able to do.
We've correctly left the low value area in Boston
and below out, and we've correctly
managed to classify some of those points
in the bottom right and top right.
We're still making mistakes, but we're
able to make a nonlinear prediction
on latitude and longitude.
So that's interesting, but the tree was very complicated.
So maybe it's drastically overfitting.
Can we get most of this effect with a much simpler tree?
We can.
We would just change the minbucket size.
So let's build a new tree using the rpart command again:
MEDV as a function of LAT and LON, the data=boston.
But this time we'll say the minbucket size must be 50.

We'll use the other way of plotting trees, plot,
and we'll add text to the text command.

And we see we have far fewer splits,
and it's far more interpretable.
The first split says if the longitude
is greater than or equal to negative 71.07--
so if you're on the right side of the picture.

So the left-hand branch is on the left-hand side
of the picture and the right-hand--
So the left-hand side of the tree
corresponds to the right-hand side of the map.
And the right side of the tree corresponds
to the left side of the map.
That's a little bit of a mouthful.
Let's see what it means visually.
So we'll remember these values, and we'll
plot the longitude and latitude again.
So here's our map.
OK.
So the first split was on longitude,
and it was negative 71.07.
So there's a very handy command, "abline,"
which can plot horizontal or vertical lines easily.
So we're going to plot a vertical line, so v,
and we wanted to plot it at negative 71.07.
OK.
So that's that first split from the tree.
It corresponds to being on either the left or right-hand
side of this tree.
We'll plot the-- what we want to do is, we'll focus on one area.
We'll focus on the lowest price prediction, which
is in the bottom left corner of the tree,
right down at the bottom left after all those splits.
So that's where we want to get to.
So let's plot again the points.
Plot a vertical line.
The next split down towards that bottom left corner
was a horizontal line at 42.21.
So I put that in.
That's interesting.
So that line corresponds pretty much to where
the Charles River was from before.
The final split you need to get to that bottom left corner I
was pointing out is 42.17.
It was above this line.
And now that's interesting.
If we look at the right side of the middle of the three
rectangles on the right side, that
is the bucket we were predicting.
And it corresponds to that rectangle, those areas.
That's the South Boston low price area we saw before.
So maybe we can make that more clear by plotting, now,
the high value prices.
So let's go back up to where we plotted all the red dots
and overlay it.
So this makes it even more clear.
We've correctly shown how the regression tree carves out
that rectangle in the bottom of Boston
and says that is a low value area.
So that's actually very interesting.
It's shown us something that regression trees can
do that we would never expect linear regression to be
able to do.
So the question we're going to answer in the next video
is given that regression trees can do these fancy things
with latitude and longitude, is it
actually going to help us to be able to build
a predictive model, predicting house prices?
Well, we'll have to see.
