
So, we saw in the previous video that the house prices
were distributed over the area in an interesting way,
certainly not the kind of linear way.
And we wouldn't necessarily expect linear regression
to do very well at predicting house price,
just given latitude and longitude.
We can kind of develop that intuition more
by plotting the relationship between latitude and house
prices-- which doesn't look very linear-- or the longitude
and the house prices, which also looks pretty nonlinear.
So, we'll try fitting a linear regression anyway.
So, let's call it latlonlm.
And we'll use the lm command, linear model,
to predict house prices based on latitude and longitude using
the boston data set.
If we take a look at our linear regression,
we see the R-squared is around 0.1, which is not great.
The latitude is not significant, which
means the north-south differences aren't
going to be really used at all.
Longitude is significant, and it's negative.
Which we can interpret as, as we go towards the ocean--
as we go towards the east-- house prices decrease linearly.
So this all seems kind of unlikely,
but let's work with it.
So let's see how this linear regression
model looks on a plot.
So let's plot the census tracts again.
OK.
Now, remember before, we had-- from the previous video--
we plotted the above-median house prices.
So we're going to do that one more time.
The median was 21.2.
We had-- the color was red.
And we used solid dots.

Ha.
Oops.
See what I did there?
I used the plot command, instead of the points command,
and it plotted just the new points.
I meant to plot the original points
and use the points command to plot it
on top of the existing plot.
OK.
So that's more like it.
So now we have the median values with the above median value
census tracts.
So, OK, we want to see, now, the question
we're going to ask, and then plot,
is what does the linear regression model think is above median.
So we could just do this pretty easily.
We have latlonlm$fitted.values and this is what the linear
regression model predicts for each of the 506 census tracts.
So we'll plot these on top.
boston$LON-- take all the census tracts,
such that the latlonlm's fitted values are above the median.
Take the latitudes, too.

And I'm going to make them blue, but let's pause for a moment
and think.
If we use the dots again, we'll cover up the red dots
and cover up some of the black dots.
What we won't be able to see is where
the red dots and the blue dots match up.
You know, we're interested in seeing
how the linear regression matches up with the truth.
So it'd be ideal if we could plot
the linear regression blue dots on top of the red dots,
in some way that we can still see the red dots.
It turns out that you can actually
pass in characters to this PCH option.
So since we're talking about money,
let's plot dollar signs instead of points.
And there you have it.
So, the linear regression model has plotted a dollar sign
for every time it thinks the census
tract is above median value.
And you can see that, indeed, it's
almost as-- you can see the sharp line
that the linear regression defines.
And how it's pretty much vertical,
because remember before, the latitude variable
was not very significant in the regression.
So that's interesting and pretty wrong.
One thing that really stands out is
how it says Boston is mostly above median.
Even knowing-- we saw it right from the start--
there's a big non-red spot, right
in the middle of Boston, where the house
prices were below the median.
So the linear regression model isn't really doing a good job.
And it's completely ignored everything
to the right side of the picture.